Fa'amatai is the indigenous political ('chiefly') system of Samoa, central to the organization of Samoan society. It is the traditional indigenous form of governance in both Samoas, comprising American Samoa and the Independent State of Samoa. The term comprises the prefix fa'a (Samoan for "in the way of") and the word matai (family name or title).
Of central importance in the system are the matai, the holders of family chief titles, and their role in looking after their family. Fa'amatai is the key socio-political system of governance and way of life (fa'a Samoa) in Samoan culture. Inherent in the fa'amatai system is the welfare and well-being of the extended family ('aiga) and the protection of family property, consisting most importantly of customary land. About 81% (567,000 acres), is under customary ownership, with the rest under the national government (malo) as public lands with another 4% freehold.At the apex of this system are the four major title holders – Tupua Tamasese, Malietoa, Mata'afa, Tuimaleali'ifano - known as the Tama-a-Aiga ('sons of the families') that afford them leadership over the royal families of Samoa. All heads of state of Samoa have been one of the four title holders. In addition, these four paramount chiefs are often accorded pāpā titles - titles that indicate sovereignty or leadership over a designated territory or kinship network. These titles are Tui Atua, Tui A'ana, Gatoaitele and Vaetamasoalii. The Tui Atua is currently held by Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Efi, former Prime Minister and Head of State of Samoa. The Gatoaitele title is currently held by Savea Sano Malifa, a respected journalist and owner of the Samoa Observer newspaper. There are no official holders of the other two pāpā titles.In the 49-seat Legislative Assembly of Samoa, all 47 Samoan members are also matai, performing dual roles as chiefs and modern politicians, with the exception of the two seats reserved for non-Samoans.The 2006 census of Samoa identified 15.783 matai out of a total population of 180.741 (8,7%); 12.589 (79.8%) were male and 3.194 (20.2%) were female.