The Filoil Flying V Centre, formerly Filoil Flying V Arena and The Arena in San Juan, also known as the Entertainment and Recreational Arena of the People (initials taken after former mayor and president Joseph Estrada's nickname 'Erap'), is an indoor sporting arena located in Santolan Road Bonny Serrano Avenue, Corazon de Jesus, San Juan, Metro Manila, Philippines.
The Centre plays host to the basketball games of the Philippine Basketball League, the National Collegiate Athletic Association, the University Athletic Association of the Philippines since 2009, the Filoil Flying V Preseason Cup, Philippine Collegiate Champions League, Maharlika Pilipinas Basketball League, as well as the volleyball games of the Premier Volleyball League. It is also one of the secondary home court of Alab Pilipinas in the ASEAN Basketball League. It is also known as the "Volleyball Central" of the Philippines, as the Centre served as the main venue for volleyball tournaments such as UAAP, NCAA, Philippine Super Liga and Premier Volleyball League. The Center was also used as a main venue for the San Juan Mayor's Cup, a basketball and volleyball tournament for the San Juan government employees.
Filoil Flying V entered in a naming rights agreement with the San Juan city government, changing the arena's name into "Filoil Flying V Arena" (renamed into Filoil Flying V Centre in 2016). It was the first such agreement in the Philippines since the San Andres Gym in Malate, Manila lent naming rights to FedEx's sister company Mail And More in 2000. Currently, it is one of two sporting venues in the Philippines to named after an external naming rights partner, the other being the Smart Araneta Coliseum.
In 2015, the San Juan government signed a 15-year deal with Homegrown Olympic Management Enterprises (Filoil Flying V Sports), the organizer of the Filoil Flying V Preseason Cup that which be helmed the day-by-day operations and management of the centre. Among the HOME's plans is to convert the Centre into a complete events venue and add a new structure for restaurants and business establishments.
The notable religious events held in San Juan Arena are 2013 Shalom 3-day Lenten Retreat with Fr. Archie Guiriba OFM, 2016 National Prayer Gathering of Intercessors for the Philippines and recently last Feb. 2020, the 20th anniversary of Greenhills Chapter of Jesus is Lord Church Worldwide